And I remember the change after the armchairs,
when mealtimes began to be much more somber,
because to begin with they tried not to discuss what was going on in front of the children, as you do.
But as time went on it got so bad that I remember the laughing and the jokes stopping,
and the discussions were all about playmates and visas and people who'd been able to get out and those who haven't.
And of course things changed dramatically at school because
after the armchairs
suddenly those of us in the class who were Jewish were kept separate from the others.
You sit over there, you're Jewish, nobody has to talk to you.
And I remember many of the girls joining the BDM, the Bundlerge Mädchen, which was like the Hitler Youth for girls.
And I remember what they wore,
including the three-quarter length white socks. And I have to say to this day,
I have a dislike for three-quarter length white socks,
although I'm not neurotic about it and my children wore them, same as everybody else, but I don't feel comfortable about them.
And I have a very very strong memory of that time, which I
always relate to people because it made a big, it had a big influence on me. I remember the teacher telling the children
that we have a new regime now,
and
you'll have noticed that things are different.
And I want you to promise me that you will come and tell me if you hear your parents or any of their friends
or your brothers and sisters saying anything nasty about this new regime that we have, you have to come and report to me.
So what she was doing, she was encouraging the children to tell on their parents, as we say.
And I found at age 10 that that was intolerable.
I was age 67, I still find it intolerable. And when I was training teachers, every year group that I
worked with, I invariably told them you must do what you think is right.
You must work out what you think is right and stick with that, not just what they are telling you.